So, I'm here with Google Chrome for
desktop.
And I'm on a Mac, but it can be
also a Linux, a Chromebook device,
or a Windows device, from Windows 7, okay?
So I just need to go to
a URL that has a PWA inside.
Many apps, it can be a Starbucks.
Even it can be, for
example, Amazon Luna or
Google Stadia for
cloud gaming, they are PWAs.
But I will try YouTube music.
It's music.youtube.com, it's a PWA.
And how do I know it's a PWA?
Well, actually, after a while,
if you look at the URL bar,
you're going to see a new
icon that will appear.
Actually, the browser is
making some tests and
we're going to talk
about that in a minute.
If the test passes, you will see this
icon that says Install YouTube Music.
And also in the menu,
you will find Install YouTube Music.
If at this point you're asking,
hey, who is going to know that?
Well, give me a second because I will show
you another example that looks better.
If I click on Install YouTube Music,
I have a nice native dialog saying,
do you wanna install the app,
YouTube music?
And I can click Install, and
it will actually install my app.
Before actually doing that,
let me show you another example.
That if you're a web designer or
web developer,
you will probably like this PWA.
It's called Squoosh.
It's squoosh.app.
It's actually an image compressor,
so you can actually drop a PNG,
even an animated GIF, and
it can compress that and
convert that into a different format or
a more compressed PNG or a WebP file.
If you look at within the UI at the top
right, we have an Install button.
This is actually not a native button,
it's HTML.
I just wanna show you this is just
a button, okay, an HTML button.
Well, actually, so
within the user interface of your PWA,
you can have a button.
And if I click there,
it actually triggers that native dialog.
And if I now install Squoosh and
also I can install YouTube Music,
what will happen is now we are going to
have standalone apps from YouTube Music.
And Squoosh, and
they have their own window,
they appear in the alt tab or
common tab YouTube Music, Squoosh.
They appear in the search, meaning if I
search for a Squoosh, I have the app.
In Windows, they appear in
the Start menu as any other app.
And now it has its own window,
and you can see at the window,
it's actually separated from
Google Chrome, from the browser.
And that's kind of the idea of how the PWA
installation looks like on desktop.
And also you can see we have other
options here such as on YouTube Music,
we have a back button.
So I can click here this is Adele,
I think.
We don't need to hear that.
And we have a back button.
We have a reload button.
And, of course, this is music so
we can actually have background
audio working here as well.
And over the title bar, we have also
a way to see all the extensions,
the Google Chrome extension.
And there is a menu where you can actually
copy the current URL because it's
still the web.
You can open this in Chrome,
you can uninstall the app or
you can access some, it's like
a mini menu from the browser, okay?
So this is different on Android,
on iOS, iPadOS, or desktop.
It depends on the iOS.
How the window is render is different.
But on both you can see that now
we have a different color for
the title bar,
Squoosh has this kind of pink there.
So we're going to see later how
we can set up these colors and
these metadata for our apps.
And it's a window, so
its responsive design will actually
respond here as a normal website.
With one specific thing that
we need to have in mind,
is that we have something known as a mini
mode, that was not available on the web.
We can actually get really small
with PWA standalone windows.
So for example, YouTube Music
when you are in the mini mode,
just renders controls, just that.
This mini mode is actually smaller
than the smaller window that
you can get in the browser.
So it's kind of a new breakpoint for
your responsive design that
you need to take care of.
We have a question about the camera APIs.
If they're better or
not compared with in the native world.
Well, let's see, if you wanna take
a picture or if you wanna record a video,
you can actually do that on every
platform, iOS, Android, iPad, and desktop.
If you wanna get more control of,
for example,
the zoom level or
some internal settings of the camera,
you have some of that on Android only,
on Google Chrome on Android, okay?
Because there is an API to actually
get some more advanced settings.
And also some of the settings
are coming to desktop.
So think about this,
most of the things, the pandemic,
a lot of tools appear to actually
do meetings, online meetings.
So every tool that you see
typically on Zoom, Meet or Teams,
it's actually coming to the web.
So Chrome is probably the leader here.
So on Chrome APIs,
you have most of the abilities
that you have also in the native world.
And on Safari,
typically it goes a little behind, but for
basic camera management, it works.
I mean on iOS you can also for example,
pick if you want the selfie camera or
the biomental camera, so
you can actually select that, that works.
But if you want more control,
like fine control, yeah,
you probably need to go native, okay?
But for video calls, it just works.
There are many PWAs that are actually
based on video calls, and
they work pretty well, starting with
Google Duo, following with Apple FaceTime.
So now with FaceTime,
it's an Apple application.
But now you can start
the session in FaceTime and
share a URL with a Windows user or
with an Android user.
And in that case,
it's a PWA created by Apple.
So FaceTime has a PWA.
Also there is a good one,
it's called desktop.com,
it's app.desktop.com,
that's the URL of the PWA that you can
actually try and see the camera use
such that they have over a PWA.
And it's just a pure PWA.
The question is about the process,
and how that works,
in terms of are we talking about
the same process as the browser?
On desktop, we should say that,
yes, it's the same process.
So when you have a PWA,
if you kill the browser process,
it will also kill your PWA.
So because we are still a website,
this is not like if you have
heard about things like electron,
in electron, it's like a hybrid,
like PhoneGap for desktop.
In that case,
when you compile an Electron application,
you're shipping your own browser engine,
your own web rendering engine.
We're not doing that on the PWA side,
with advantages and problems.
So one of the problem is that if you
close or if you kill the Chrome or
the browser's process,
you're also killing the app.
It's not typical use case,
but, yeah, it might happen.
The advantage is that we
are not consuming more memory,
because it's the same rendering engine.
And most users always
have that browser opened.
So we're not consuming more
resources from the desktop.
Another great advantage,
really great advantage,
is that because it's actually the same
process, you can share cookies,
store ASH, IndexeDB,
data between the browser and the PWA.
Because it's actually the same thing.
So these windows that we have here
are actually like a browser tab,
but outside of the browser.
In fact, we can also create, you can see
that I'm in YouTube Music that looks
like any other Mac application
with its own menu.
I can great the new window, so I can have
two YouTube Music windows, okay, for
example.
And if I sign in,
I'm going to sign in on both,
because it's actually
the same as the browser.
So we have a better goal question, can we
control the minimum size of the window?
And I will make it a browser question.
Can we set up the preferred size of
the window or the position of the window?
Actually today, the specs that we're going
to cover later don't have that support.
So we cannot set in some place a minimum.
However, we can use some APIs that
has been in the web since the 90s,
since I ever started doing web
development, that works pretty well here.
So it's just some global functions and
variables that we have
available in the Window option.
So we can resize the window.
Because we are in a standalone window,
we have the power to do that.
With tabs and browsers, typically we
cannot change the browser window size.
But because this is our own window,
we can actually learn from JavaScript.
With just simple call, we can resize,
we can reposition the window.
So if the user goes beyond
a size that you define,
with JavaScript and
listening to the resize event,
you can actually go back to your minimum.
So using some JavaScript,
you can actually make that work.
Here you can see a Windows PWA.
So trivago for a hotel search.
You go to trivago on Windows,
you install the app, and now that app is
available on Windows as with the Mac,
and that app will be resizable.
And also it's going to be available in the
third menu like any other app on Windows.
Just remember this is,
this is not just on the latest Windows.
This is the Starbuck's PWA
running on Windows 7.
For those of you working
with enterprise customers.
So this is something new,
that it's actually pretty cool.
So if you have ever worked with these
corporate customers like banks and
financial companies,
they typically don't have permission.
Users don't have permission
to install apps.
They can just use the browser.
And those were actually probably
their responsibles of i.e.,
still been here with us,
because they cannot install other browser.
But let's say that era has ended.
So today, they typically have
Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge.
Well, even if a user cannot install
native apps, they can install PWAs.
Because it's actually a browser's process.
So if a user, corporate user,
has permission to install the browser,
to use the browser,
they have permission to install PWAs.
So when you do corporate applications,
you can actually deploy, deploy in quotes,
because we are not actually deploying
an app, we are deploying a website.
But we can deploy corporate
apps without the intervention
of the security teams within that company.
So today, this is global stats worldwide,
installation can happen in 86%
of the use of browsing the web.
So let's say that roughly nine
of ten users that are actually
visiting your website can
actually install a PWA.
And when we check offline support,
it's 93%, but 86 can install the app.
Probably you're thinking here,
okay, where is the rest?
So why we still have like 10%
of the users without support?
Well, we do not have support or
plans to support from an Android Facebook.
And probably you're thinking Facebook Max,
that's not the browser.
But actually, I'm not sure.
When I'm saying Facebook,
it's Facebook the company,
it involves many products including
Instagram and even Messenger.
When you click on a link on those apps,
by default,
that link is rendered in an inner browser,
not actually in the real browser.
And that's called
the Mobile Facebook Browser.
Well, PWAs are not compatible
with that situation.
And again, when I'm saying not compatible,
that doesn't mean that your content won't
be rendered, because it's a website, okay?
And later we're going to talk about the P,
the first letter in PWA has to
do with progressive enhancement.
And the whole idea is that if one ability,
one capability is not available,
anyway, the basic content will work.
On iOS and iPadOS, it doesn't work on
any other browser that is on Safari and
it doesn't work on the Apple Watch.
The Apple Watch has a browser, but it's
not supporting the technology for PWAs.
And why Google Chrome or
Firefox or Edge on iOS are not
supporting PWAs, that's an Apple decision.
So those browsers are actually
not what you think they are.
So Google Chrome on iOS,
it's not actually Google Chrome.
It looks like Google Chrome.
It has the Google Chrome icon.
You can synchronize your
bookmarks with Google Chrome, but
the rendering engine is actually Safari,
WebKit to be technically accurate.
So is the WebKit WebView.
Well, PWAs are not available there.
And Firefox on desktop and
Opera on desktop,
they do not support PWAs installation.
They do support PWA
installation on mobile.
And Safari on the Mac is also not
suitable for installation at this point.
So Safari on iOS only.
And finally, also in talking generally,
we don't have
support in Smart TVs,
Smartwatches, Game Consoles, or
XR Headsets, that's augmented reality or
virtual reality.
There are some exceptions to that,
such as the Hololens or the Xbox,
that through the store, not through
the browser, but through the app store,
you can actually deploy or
distribute a PWA.
And Facebook has also
announced that they will
support PWAs in the Oculus platform later.